# Development Setup Guide

This document describes instructions to setup an environment for developing and
building the Ulysses firmware.

## Table of contents

<!-- autogenerated TOC begin -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

- [Development Setup Guide](#development-setup-guide)
    - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
    - [Installing the toolchain](#installing-the-toolchain)
        - [Installing STM32CubeIDE](#installing-stm32cubeide)
        - [Installing ARM GNU Toolchain](#installing-arm-gnu-toolchain)
            - [Installing ARM GNU Toolchain using an archive](#installing-arm-gnu-toolchain-using-an-archive)
            - [Installing ARM GNU Toolchain using an installer](#installing-arm-gnu-toolchain-using-an-installer)
        - [Installing Ninja](#installing-ninja)
        - [Installing CMake](#installing-cmake)
    - [Optional tools](#optional-tools)
        - [Installing STM32CubeMX](#installing-stm32cubemx)
    - [Setting up VS Code](#setting-up-vs-code)
        - [Installing VS Code](#installing-vs-code)
        - [Installing recommended extensions](#installing-recommended-extensions)
    - [Adding debugging support to VS Code](#adding-debugging-support-to-vs-code)
        - [Getting necessary OpenOCD paths](#getting-necessary-openocd-paths)
            - [Windows](#windows)
            - [macOS](#macos)
            - [Linux](#linux)
        - [Configuring the Cortex-Debug extension for OpenOCD](#configuring-the-cortex-debug-extension-for-openocd)
    - [See also](#see-also)

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- autogenerated TOC end -->

## Installing the toolchain

### Installing STM32CubeIDE

> [!important]
> You will need a myST account to download and install this tool.

[STM32CubeIDE][stm32cubeide] is the IDE provided by ST for developing software
on STM32 MCUs and MPUs.

It can be installed by downloading and running the appropriate installer for
your operating system in the `Get Software` section on its web page.

We will not use STM32CubeIDE for development (i.e. editing source code and
debugging). However, its installation provides a pre-compiled distribution
of [ST's customized version of OpenOCD][stm_openocd], that we will use as
the GDB server. This is as the upstream OpenOCD currently does not support the
`STM32H563` MCU we are using.

[stm32cubeide]: https://www.st.com/en/development-tools/stm32cubeide.html
[stm_openocd]: https://github.com/STMicroelectronics/OpenOCD

### Installing ARM GNU Toolchain

The [Arm GNU Toolchain][arm_gnu_toolchain] is the GNU cross-compiler toolchain
for Arm targets.

To download the toolchain, scroll down and expand the accordion menu for the
version of the toolchain you want (the latest version is expanded by default).
In the menu, find the toolchain with a host (shown in bolded text on the page)
that matches your current machine (e.g. Windows, Linux, macOS). In the section
for your host, download the toolchain for a
`AArch32 bare-metal target (arm-none-eabi)`.

Depending on your host, the toolchain may be installed through different
methods as described below.

You can verify if you have installed the toolchain correctly by running the
following commands depending on your host.

```shell
# Windows
arm-none-eabi-gcc.exe --version

# macOS
arm-none-eabi-gcc --version

# Linux
arm-none-eabi-gcc --version
```

[arm_gnu_toolchain]: https://developer.arm.com/downloads/-/arm-gnu-toolchain-downloads

#### Installing ARM GNU Toolchain using an archive

The most basic installation method is to download an archive of the toolchain
and extract it to a known location and adding the `bin/` folder of the toolchain
to the system PATH. The `bin/` folder added should contain binaries named as
`arm-none-eabi-*`.

#### Installing ARM GNU Toolchain using an installer

> [!note]
> There is no installer provided for Linux hosts.

For Windows and macOS hosts, you can download an installer which simply extracts
the toolchain to some location. For Windows, the installer shows the location
to which it will place the toolchain. For macOS, it may not show the location
and so you may need to look around common application install locations to find
it. After finding a path to the toolchain, you can follow the same steps as in
[installing using the archive](#installing-arm-gnu-toolchain-using-the-archive)
to add it to the system PATH.

### Installing Ninja

[Ninja][ninja_build] is the build system we use for the firmware. You will not
interact with it directly, but rather through CMake.

It can be installed by following the steps on the site.

You can verify your installation by running the command

```shell
ninja --version
```

[ninja_build]: https://ninja-build.org

### Installing CMake

[CMake][cmake] is the meta-build system that we use for the firmware.

Follow the instructions on its site to download and install it for your host
machine. Ensure that you are using a version greater or equal to `3.22`.

You can verify your installation by running the command

```shell
cmake --version
```

[cmake]: https://cmake.org

## Optional tools

These are tools that are not used regularly for development but may have
a purpose for certain situations.

### Installing STM32CubeMX

> [!important]
> You will need a myST account to download and install this tool.

[STM32CubeMX][stm32cubemx] is a tool provided by ST for graphically configuring
STM32 MCUs and MPUs, as well as provide generation of initialization code.

It can be installed by downloading and running the appropriate installer for
your operating system in the `Get Software` section on its web page.

We use STM32CubeMX for configuring pins on our MCU as well as bootstrapping the
initial project. Configuration files for STM32CubeMX have the extension `.ioc`.

[stm32cubemx]: https://www.st.com/en/development-tools/stm32cubemx.html

## Setting up VS Code

We use [Visual Studio Code (VS Code)][vscode] as our primary development editor.

[vscode]: https://code.visualstudio.com

### Installing VS Code

Follow the steps provided by the official guide on
[Setting up Visual Studio Code][setting_up_vscode].

[setting_up_vscode]: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/setup-overview

### Installing recommended extensions

> [!important]
> Unless you have your own working extension setup, you should definitely
> install these recommended extensions.

To view the recommended extensions, open the VS Code Command Palette
(`Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Cmd+Shift+P`) and run the
`Extensions: Show Recommended Extensions` command. This will open up the
`WORKSPACE RECOMMENDATIONS` section of the `EXTENSIONS` sidebar. To download all
the recommended extensions, click the `Install Workspace Recommended Extensions`
button (displayed as a cloud icon).

Alternatively, you can install the recommended extensions manually using the
extension identifiers listed in `.vscode/extensions.json`.

## Adding debugging support to VS Code

This section will describe how to setup remote debugging support in VS Code for
the firmware.

As we are using ST's customized OpenOCD, we will need to quite a bit of
configuration to have Cortex-Debug use it as the GDB server.

### Getting necessary OpenOCD paths

To properly configure Cortex-Debug, we will need to know two paths

- `OPENOCD_BINARY_PATH`: Path to the OpenOCD binary
- `STM32_OPENOCD_SCRIPTS_PATH`: Path to the OpenOCD scripts folder

#### Windows

The `OPENOCD_BINARY_PATH` depends on your version of STM32CubeIDE, but should
generally be similar to

```text
D:/ST/STM32CubeIDE_1.19.0/STM32CubeIDE/plugins/com.st.stm32cube.ide.mcu.externaltools.openocd.win32_2.4.200.202505051030/tools/bin/openocd.exe
```

Similarly, `STM32_OPENOCD_SCRIPTS_PATH` will look like

```text
D:/ST/STM32CubeIDE_1.19.0/STM32CubeIDE/plugins/com.st.stm32cube.ide.mcu.debug.openocd_2.3.100.202501240831/resources/openocd/st_scripts
```

> [!tip]
> Convert these paths to be in a UNIX path format (forward slashes) to make
> handling them in strings easier.

#### macOS

`OPENOCD_BINARY_PATH` will resemble

```text
/Applications/STM32CubeIDE.app/Contents/Eclipse/plugins/com.st.stm32cube.ide.mcu.externaltools.openocd.macos64_2.4.200.202505051030/tools/bin/openocd
```

`STM32_OPENOCD_SCRIPTS_PATH` will resemble

```text
/Applications/STM32CubeIDE.app/Contents/Eclipse/plugins/com.st.stm32cube.ide.mcu.debug.openocd_2.3.100.202501240831/resources/openocd/st_scripts
```

#### Linux

### Configuring environment variables for OpenOCD

The debug launch configurations reference two environment variables. You must
set both of these in your shell profile (e.g. `~/.bashrc`, `~/.zshrc`, or
`~/.config/fish/config.fish`).

See the [README](../../../README.md#environment-variables) for platform-specific path
examples.

| Variable | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `STM32_OPENOCD_PATH` | Path to the OpenOCD **binary** bundled with STM32CubeIDE |
| `STM32_OPENOCD_SCRIPTS_PATH` | Path to the OpenOCD **st_scripts** directory |

For example, on Linux you would add the following to your `~/.bashrc`:

```shell
export STM32_OPENOCD_PATH="/opt/st/stm32cubeide_<version>/plugins/com.st.stm32cube.ide.mcu.externaltools.openocd.linux64_<version>/tools/bin/openocd"
export STM32_OPENOCD_SCRIPTS_PATH="/opt/st/stm32cubeide_<version>/plugins/com.st.stm32cube.ide.mcu.debug.openocd_<version>/resources/openocd/st_scripts"
```

> [!important]
> You must restart VS Code (and potentially your shell) after adding the
> environment variables to get VS Code to recognize them.

## See also

[Cortex-Debug extension wiki](https://github.com/Marus/cortex-debug/wiki)
